# Further work

## To Do

- Make this a full stack application by adding a single page web app as the user interface.
  - This is a pretty simple api. How can an already lightweight API be improved by an SPA?
    - Remove server side rendering:
      - Currently only the form content is rendered.
    - Make form data more robust
      - Passing data in JSON format removes type ambiguity.
        - Which is to say JSON can represent the value of "" != null; "1" != 1
    - Placing static content in the SPA removes the need to cache it on the server side.
    - Current static content:
      - Images
        - Binary images can be cached in a CDN
        - Static SVG can be a part of an SPA or cached in a CDN
        - Dynamic images can be generated as SVGs - rather than as binary images generated by middleware
      - Stylesheets/Structured page rendering
      - Scripts (At least server side value calculations)
- Implement caching
  - How to efficently store static data which will be returned, without reading it from the filesystem every time
    - Cache it client side or in a CDN
- Handle multiple methods
  - Get - Read data
    - Retrieve data from the server (either from a static or dynamic url)
  - Post - Create data
    - Normally user facing
    - Resubmitting the data could create a new record
    - Normally uses a static url
    - Content-Type is either multipart/form-data or application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  - Put - Update (or create)
    - Non interactive
    - Structure the logic to expect the entire object rather than logic that expects only a part of the data
      - Eg. pass the whole user object, even if only the name is updated
      - Normally dynamic urls contain subject/unique ID
    - Content-Type could be anything
    - Per RFC json content-type is application/json
      - Fastjson and Jackson are widely used.
  - Delete - Delete path to data (like a symlink)

## Maybe To Do

- Implement authentication and authorization for secure access.
  - Do not have an SSO server like keycloak set up.

## Will Not Do (No relevant or out of scope)

- Implement data backup and recovery for disaster recovery.
  - Out of scope
- Implement rate limiting and throttling for security and performance.
  - Out of scope
- Implement continuous integration and deployment for automated testing and deployment.
  - Out of scope/Jenkins not set up
- Implement automated disaster recovery testing
  - Out of scope (but a good idea)
- Implement load balancing for improved performance.

## Done

- Add a backend API to handle data storage and retrieval.
  - This includes REST/CRUD api's for Get and Put
- Optimize performance and scalability for high traffic.
- Implement monitoring and logging for better insights.
- Implement security measures such as input validation and encryption.
